[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, one of the
big topics of discussion, there are a
lot of topics of discussion nowadays,
but when it comes to the recent uh
takeover of Venezuela, the Trump
administration's takeover of Venezuela,
I don't know how
>> acquisition, I don't know how to
describe it. Um, but the action in
Venezuela, one of the themes or things
that you saw people talking about was
this idea that, well, even if the goal
is to get more oil, Venezuela's oil
industry is a mess.
>> It's in shambles, right?
>> Yeah. So, you hear things about, you
know, ships that are rusting in the dock
and pumps that don't work and whatever.
people talking about really creaky
infrastructure and also just a bad
environment for doing business.
>> Yeah. I mean this is the thing and so in
the Venezuela specific context we know
that the oil infrastructure has been
degraded for years which is why there is
all these numbers about the massive
amounts of upfront investment that would
be required to get the oil started. But
then there is this other phenomenon
that's global which is that there's
really not much of a connection per se
between the existence of natural
resources in the ground and some way to
get them out commercially anywhere. This
also happens to be the case in
Greenland. It happens to be the case in
Western Australia which is a very like
well-run country which is that assets in
the ground or anywhere mean nothing
without the sort of rule of law refining
processing shipping infrastructure etc.
So all these places of various different
degrees, the actual existence of some
asset, in Venezuela's case, oil, that's
only part of the story.
>> Absolutely. So this got me thinking,
what is it like to actually uh do some
sort of industrial business in a place
like Venezuela, and I always wanted to
do more on the Venezuelan economy. I I
think it's pretty interesting and more
interesting now. So that is exactly what
we're going to do today. We're also
going to talk about doing business in
another um
>> hotspot.
>> Hot spot. Hotspot is a good way of
putting it, which is Ukraine,
>> right? We did a number of episodes um in
immediately after Russia's invasion of
Ukraine talk about the effects on the
grain business. But the important thing,
which we didn't get into that much,
although I think we did a little bit, is
like, well, the grain business, the
wheat export business, it still exists.
It was impaired. But then the day-to-day
business of running a commercial
operation in that intense environment,
how that changes and so forth and so
forth. How does that change under uh the
new competitive strains? And I just want
to say one more thing which is you know
when you talked about well what is the
right word now to describe our
relationship with Venezuela. It's I've
been thinking about a lot of this too
because
>> you have a word.
>> No I don't because it it's very context
dependent. Right. If you were to listen
to the administration he's like oh
Madura was arrested right? If you
believe this was a flagrant violation of
international law, you'd say he was
kidnapped, etc. There's almost no words
to describe it. You saw the president
talking about already selling Venezuelan
oil. So, whose oil is this already? It's
just a it's a very odd situation to say
the least.
>> Definitely. Um, okay. So, speaking of
odd situations, we have the perfect
guests to talk about them.
>> And just I just got to say I got a
headline. US seeks immediate talks on
acquiring Greenland, Trump says. So, at
some point we will have another
conversation about weird relationships
with parts of the world that we um
didn't think about as much.
>> Yeah, the Greenland economy episode is
uh is inevitably going to arrive. Okay,
so we're going to be speaking with Jeff
Kasin. He is the co-founder of Agris
Academy and also the other co-founder
Mike Rolson. So, Jeff and Mike, thank
you so much for coming on. Really
appreciate it.
>> Thanks for having us.
>> Yeah, thanks for having us. So, first of
all, why don't you give us a sort of um
nutshell summary of your career history
because this is why we're talking to
you. Both of you had very long
interesting careers at Cargill, which
is, you know, one of the massive massive
agricultural conglomerates among other
things. So, talk to us about why why
we're talking to you, I guess.
>> Yeah, I guess I'll start out. This is
Jeff Kasin. I um I did a full career in
cardio 30 years and you know started at
the ground up you know at the you know
Baton Rouge Louisiana ports buying grain
to go to export was a head of wheat
trading did a lot of wheat trading at
some point spent some time in their
mergers acquisition shop around the
world looking at various businesses
ended up as a CEO of a joint venture
between Cargill and Monsanto at the time
switched over into the vegetable oils
particularly the refined vegetable oils
was the head of trading for the what we
call the west. So the western hemisphere
on the refined oil side and that's
actually where my time with Venezuela
was connected. Cargo had a very large uh
oils business there actually a packaged
oils business and I finished up my
career um in the feed side. A lot of
aquaculture, very large salmon feeders
around the world, shrimp, all kinds of
various aquaculture and then really the
western side uh south Latin America on
the feed side all the way to Argentina.
So, a typical uh highly varied uh cargo
career.
>> Similar story with me back then when
Jeff and I started, you know, cargle
intentionally threw you around to many
different places. So, yeah, I had three
different domestic roles in the in the
early to mid '90s uh that that got your
feet wet in different markets in the
United States. And I also was involved
on the export side out of Houston, you
know, similar to what Jeff did. And then
about five years in, I got tapped on the
shoulder to go to Ukraine. There was no
real commercial presence for Cargill
then. I was
>> What year are we talking about? Sorry.
>> This was this would have been April of
1995.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. So, I was uh I was young. I was
single. I spoke Russian. I was uh
perhaps tongue and cheek.
>> You ticked all the boxes.
>> Expendable
and uh you know with a with a blank
slate that that not really knowing what
was going on at the time and probably
rather difficult to find people to come
there. Yeah. I I I I had raised my hand
already to go and and and fortunately
they they circled back to me and gave me
that opportunity and it was five
wonderful years there taking it
basically from a from a theoretical
representative office to I think I think
we had seven or eight business units and
a couple hundred million dollars
invested. So it was a wonderful
experience over those 5 years and uh I
also was with Jeff in the merger and
acquisition shop uh shortly after
returning and uh went into corporate
ventures for a while after that and left
Cargill a little earlier than Jeff did
and went through a tech and and um tech
oriented venture capital. Then about 3
years ago we kicked this off. Um, I hope
you guys are cool with us turning this
into a fivehour conversation now because
I imagine there's an incredible number
of stories and I already have a uh
billion questions. So, we're going to be
doing a little bit of that on the fly.
Jeff, talk to us about the years you did
business with Venezuela and maybe the
difference in what years those were and
then the sort of different conditions
from like the beginning to the end as
you saw them.
>> Yeah. So, uh, because of the oils
business, I was attached to that and I'd
like to say that, um, it was a varied
business and I ended up and I have a lot
of grain experience, too. So, I ended up
kind of the head of overseeing trading
for all of it. And probably the the
biggest statement is I think when I
started the boulevard, the currency was
like 1 to 800.
And this is and I get my years right and
I think you know three years later it
was like 1 to 12,000 or something like
that. We ended up we ended up in that
period of super hyperinflation where the
economy basically seizes up and you know
you [clears throat] watch from the
capability if you don't have a
functioning currency and the government
makes you sell in local currency in
order to go you have to have some way to
exchange it and we effectively became
dependent on the government to do the
exchange to go out and buy dollarized
raw materials. Right now, 80% of global
trade is still in dollars and a lot of
the grain trade is. And that probably is
the most single telling thing. The
currency ceased to function and that
[clears throat] really changed the game
on the ground in Venezuela.
>> I want to get into some of the currency
complications in a little bit, but I was
surprised that Cargill had any business
at all in Venezuela. Can you just tell
us what exactly Cargill was doing over
there?
>> Yeah, and keep in mind I'm currently a
former employee and and Cargill does not
own the business there anymore. I was
reached out to by Cargill. Basically,
this is very typical of Cargill. They'll
have females. They'll go in, they they
go out, they'll start with females,
they'll uh they had the long-term salt.
Salt was a big play there. Cargo is a
large producer globally of salt. A lot
of things quietly. I think there was a
lot of industrial use salt there. They
had the prochemical business was using
salt. I don't actually am not an expert
on the petrochemical side. And then
they're in lots of food processing
businesses around the world. In this
case, you know, they were natural flour
millers, uh, oil refineries, oil
bottlers, the rice I had not seen
anywhere else in the world. Um, it was
actually gone by the time I got there.
Uh, pasta plants. So in this case,
probably the more unique thing was that
not only were we doing primary
processing, but we were going all the
way to consumer. They actually had a
very I think the number one brand that
they had bought over time. I think there
was an acquisition from Bungy predates
me uh in there also. So they were, you
know, this was a very wealthy country
and and a place where you could do some
very good business in and then repeat
that model in multiple countries all
over the world. And so um yeah, that's
how they got there. It was very natural
flow and they had a very large
investment [music] there.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Mike on Ukraine, you know, 1995 is still
the early days of real posts Soviet
optimism, right? And people hadn't
become jaded yet, and they probably
hadn't woken up to sort of all the
various pathologies and stuff that would
occur in the wake of the dissolution of
the Soviet Union, etc. talk a little bit
about the calculation and the hopes for
Ukraine and the degree to which you know
over the many years that you've uh paid
attention to this market and worked in
it how they unfolded relative to say
expectations.
>> Well, I I I almost would say you uh
underestimated the optimism at the time
you know in in in 95 there was a
tremendous amount of optimism there. We
had a very dynamic team. Quite frankly,
uh even the older folks that we would
find uh to help be a part of what we
were doing commercially, even though
they all they had known is is the
system, there there were folks that that
were experienced and hardworking and
very excited to to to jump into uh the
sort of things that we were doing in a
very differentiated way. So we had we
had rock stars in our group that were 22
and out of school and we had rock stars
that were 60 years old that were
probably had had some sort of legacy
experience in agriculture uh in the
Soviet Union but was able to translate
that to us and uh it was an absolutely
um fantastic experience back then. It
was more than just a job. It was you
felt it was transformational. It was uh
>> you were changing the way business got
done there. There was there was an
insane amount of chaos but working in a
regimented uh ethical way got you
business by by uh you know in another
route. So yeah we made it work. It was
it was classic cargle at the time sort
of being sort of pioneering and and
entrepreneurial and uh yeah we made it
work and started with the trading side
and slowly but surely put assets on the
ground and a lot of other more formal
things that made it look more and more
like a regular geography by the time you
know the year 2000 rolled around and and
when I left.
>> So Mike you were on the ground in
Ukraine and Jeff you were managing the
Venezuela business remotely. What was
that actually like? because I imagine
you know we're talking about um a couple
decades back now communication must have
been more difficult than it is even
nowadays
know it was very typical I wouldn't say
you know there was we had leading edge
uh AS400s back in the day and so
communications always been a priority of
a trading firm and so there was a lot of
investment in that right you know that
was very typical that you would have one
now remember I'm a trading manager not
the overall business manager But I would
have, you know, we would have local
merchants in each country. And you've
got to connect and coordinate that. You
know, think about if you're buying, say
you're buying a multi-g grocery boat
cargo, you're going to load that cargo
in New Orleans with all kinds of
different commodities and it's going to,
you know, you're going to leverage that
out to get your freight cost down and
create competitive advantage. And so
you're coordinating um all your
different trading groups in the region.
And then that actually goes out on a
global basis. So you you're constantly
looking for that edge. So I play the
coordination role and then at the local
level like you have to have local
expertise on the ground. Particularly in
the case as Venezuela started to become
unstable. You need people that
understand how to navigate the
government, how to navigate the various,
you know, channels to get things and
continue to get things done. And that
takes local knowhow. So that was kind of
that big picture role that I would be
filling and of course the risk
management side. And then you have that
very local execution side to make things
happen. You got to have both.
>> Yeah. And the same proxy existed for us
at least in our our external
communication and how we linked up. So
my my usual routes of communication went
through our Geneva office and then you
know outward throughout the throughout
the rest of Cargill. So the external
communication was world class. We had
satellite uh phones through which we ran
our modems and that kind of thing early
on at least. Internal a whole different
story. I could probably waste 45 minutes
explaining uh just simple sending a fax
type story and things like that in 1995
and 1996 but uh before things got a
little bit better um integrated but but
yeah it was it was a dichotomy between
internal and external but uh manageable
nonetheless.
>> One of my first journalism jobs was
literally monitoring the fax machine and
making sure if a fax came in that the
newsroom would be aware of it. Thrilling
times. We could easily do an hour on
internal communications and the sort of
like pre- email, pre-Slack, preIB, well
the preIB era is very long ago, but pre
uh you know pre-digital document
management in general and how that must
have been and maybe we'll have you back
just to talk one day about that. Um
Jeeoff, I remember I had a um it's
interesting enough I forgot about this
but when my first year of college I had
a roommate who I think had done some
mission work for his church uh in
Venezuela and he was there when uh he by
the time he was roommates he was talking
about oh this guy Hugo Chavez it looks
like he's going to win this is going to
be bad news etc and so should have taken
that more seriously and paid more
attention. What was though the point a
lot of people were concerned about
Chavez obviously. What was the point
though in which you sort of saw like
okay this is this is turning down and
what was it and what was the process by
which like oh we are starting to get
serious inflation we are starting to
have a more difficult time doing
business or importing mach dollar
denominated machinery when did that sort
of sink in for the business? Yeah. So I
I arrived, we were already to Maduro, so
we were already So Chavez uh the time
there had already passed and you know it
it's the it's the frog in the boiling
pot, right? It it starts small and then
it starts to you know and then you get
all these unintended consequences
>> and you're you're trying to and then you
know as a socialist regime you're trying
to plug holes, right? And all these
things that start to go on and plus you
know the you also have a government that
is
healthfully paranoid about being
overthrown, right? There's a power
aspect that's going on in all of this at
the same time. I think it really really
took a plunge. I mean, it wasn't good at
Chavez, but when the currency and, you
know, as you said, the oil industry
starts to deteriorate. So, that spet of
dollars is dry drying off. It takes ever
more dollars to pay off everybody in the
system, right? It's a constant payoff
system. and and then you just you don't
have enough money so you just run the
printing press, right? And I can
remember this. There was a point it got
it happened so fast a couple stories.
One is the BTU of a paper boulevard the
BTU value is worth more than it could
buy.
>> You could burn it.
>> So you literally burn them for fuel.
>> You could burn it for fuel. That's
crazy. And and there was a time where
they were they were having the
boulevards printed um but they didn't
pay their printing bill and they were
flying it and the printing was being
done in dollars outside the country.
They didn't have enough money to buy the
boulevards to fly them in. So you really
you started running out of currency on
the ground like just even if you wanted
to work on it. There's all kinds of
these kind of stories, but it was right
in that probably two years into Maduro
space when when the currency stopped
functioning, that was really when we
knew we were in trouble.
>> Just to go back to something you said,
so an American company working in any
foreign country has to abide by American
laws, particularly related to things
like bribery and corruption. And maybe
for both of you and I imagine you know
that this is a very prominent issue in
both these countries maybe more in
Venezuela than Ukraine etc. but we know
that there's significant corruption in
Ukraine etc. Can you talk a little bit
about essentially how you function in
these environments where probably lots
of people are getting paid off literally
or in the bribery sense and how you have
to navigate that from the perspective of
a multinational.
>> I'll start.
>> Sure. and and going back again within
the uh the perspective of the mid 90s
there there were two impediments
and and I use the word impediment you
know not not that it impeded us but it
it it did create a headwind for shall we
say the ease of doing business and the
scale of doing business.
>> Yeah. So, so, uh, the the two parts that
created impediments for us is is there
still was a fair amount of governmental
influence in the grain business in 1995
and it really was from a county
perspective and a state or what they
referred to as obelist perspective all
the way up to the central government. So
there were plenty of ways to keep those
people happy and quietly buy grain at
scale that would also go through a
state-owned railroad system and a
stateowned port system. So most of the
infrastructure and there were
gatekeepers at various stages that could
easily be u catalyzed shall we say uh to
get grain out the door at very
reasonable numbers and trade at at at at
large scale. And I would uh I could name
names but I you know there there's
plenty of uh some of the global traders
that don't have to apply to to the US u
rule rulesbased system. So what we
basically did is did it old school. We
went straight to the farms in smaller
quantities, in reasonable amounts with
people we could trust and just gutted it
out through atypical ways of of getting
the grain out of the country, which
ironically is um some of the
infrastructure that we built on the
Danube River system that it's very
lumpy. It's trans shipment through
cranes and and evacuation systems and
things like that as opposed to a big,
you know, highcale elevator. Those are
some of the things today that are
getting grain out of the country because
some of the main elevators have been uh
destroyed or damaged in some way. So
that was our biggest problem. You know,
uh it you could get around it and quite
frankly it was more rewarding doing it
that way because we saw our impact on
the a sector. But uh that was that was
sort of the big picture reality at the
time when I first got there. I think in
my case it is comforting as operating is
to know you don't have to pay those type
of bribes or facilitating payments. The
company had a did a very good job of
instilling that everybody who joined
trained on it yearly and and quite
frankly backed it up right if you didn't
make your numbers because you would have
had to paid a bribe to get there. It
didn't hurt you career-wise. They knew
you talk about it. you tell them I'm not
going to do this and it happened and we
had these stories that happened but it
so on that side it made it very clear
for your employees to know how to
operate. The other thing I want you to
think about in the global food space,
right, is if you're a Nestle or Fritole
or one of that and you're buying raw
materials. So you have a plant in
Venezuela,
>> okay?
>> You want to make sure that you have food
safe product, US grade, and you know the
standards, right? Food safety. You want
to actually, it actually draws business
to you, right?
>> The brand value of American food,
>> right? and that you're going to act
honestly and they don't have to pay a
bribe to get a truck, you know, to the
plant on that day, right? That things
like that that the way you can do
business. So uh at that time let's call
them western companies they're listed
now today more modern companies they
like to go to some of these early
markets together and uh because you they
knew that they had a supplier that you
know if you were making malt barley for
the brewery and it's a you know South
African brewery they knew that you were
actually going to you know make a
contract and stick to the contract no
matter what if we had to work it out
there was crop failure you would you
know hold your word was your bond and
you know I'm going to tip a hat off to
my former employee, they were very good
about how that operated and I worked
with them in places basically in any all
the corners of the world and everything
from you know fish meal to lysine to
wheat that brand uh helps out in these
environments because you you know your
the customers can count on you and in
food super important right because if
you screw that up you can kill somebody
and um or tarnish the customer's
right if something gets through this
that's the same way it is in the US
actually but not with the maybe the same
criticality when you're working in a
remote location around the world
>> so this actually leads into something
I'm really curious about which is
obviously Cargill is a private company
operating at that time under a socialist
regime under Maduro what was the
relationship like just between a private
commercial enterprise and a socialist
government especially for something as
critical as food, right? I imagine the
government cared about the food supply.
>> We we we had to follow both sets of
laws, right? You have to follow the
local law, too, right? So, if they say
you must transact in Boulevard, you have
to transact in Boulevard. Now, we didn't
have Tether or Bitcoin at this point,
right? So, the world's changing in an
interesting way. Um, you have to follow
that. I mean, you you know, you don't
want to, I don't know, poke the bear,
right? And then you have to have people
that become experts in how whatever
government you're working with runs and
we do and that's how we but this was a
very common still is common to operate
in some of these places where
>> you know you know places that have cocoa
right you know some of the African
countries there Zimbabwe right South
Africa um you still have this situation
you have to become there is a
competitive advantage in becoming
experts at working in difficult places.
>> Were you ever pressured though, for
instance, to lower grocery prices?
>> Oh, absolutely. All the time. Right. And
there were laws on theoretically how
much you could make and how the counting
was done on that. And you know, if we
had a global rice shortage, it was not
the fact that we had a global rice
shortage and prices rising. It was
Cargill that was doing it to, you know,
to the people. You you had to have an
escapegoat effectively. And you know at
some point you just know that you can't
import at uh price X and sell it for X
minus you know a bunch and you you'll
just bleed out. And quite frankly at
some point in several geographies we get
a situation where corporation says we
will put no more dollars in the country
and we were there and I can still
remember that. So if we wanted to import
something, we had to get dollars either
from the government or figure out how to
export something that created dollars.
So that's where you really start to
struggle because you basically relying
on the government to exchange boulevards
for dollars. Um, and that's where we
tried all kinds of things to try to
export. I mean, there was salt there. We
tried pallets, but every time you tried
to do something, somebody in the economy
was like grabbing that. Oh, no. if you
really want to move that, you know, to
the port, that's going to require some
facilitation payment or something like
that. It just and the team down there
was desperately trying to because the
other thing we needed beyond just raw
materials, we needed spare parts. And
this maybe lies to your question about
what's the situation there. You know, if
you need to buy some electrical
equipment from Seammens, they're not
going to want boulevards
>> and they want euros or dollars. So, we
were having to try to figure out how to
generate enough dollars just to get
spare parts. And um you know, I'm not
sure how I can only speak from my
situation is now the team is really
focused instead of kind of on their
day-to-day job of running logistics and
and parts, you know, and getting things
in. Um their jobs switch to how do we
originate dollars? So you have, you
know, a couple people that are just
expert in government and maybe like camp
out at government offices for long
periods of time trying to figure out
winding through the red tape. And then
you have people trying to figure out,
you know, hey, can we, you know, put uh
one ton one kilo bag or one metric ton
bags together of salt that's sitting in
this pile and get them out of the
country and sell them to generate
dollars. So now you have a dollar
generation team and that can that can
play out all over Argentina before Malay
I don't know what the situation is now
was like that also when you have
hyperinflation
you get into the situation where you
have to have a team that's just hunting
dollars
>> I wasn't expecting the conversation to
go in this but for either one of you and
Jeff you mentioned the non I wasn't
expecting to talk about tether in this
episode but in today 2026
When you think about sort of these
currency bottlenecks that exist, do
cryptocurrencies or whether it's stable
coins or something truly decentralized
like Bitcoin, are people seriously
either implementing or thinking about
how some of these new uh financial
technologies can solve pain points
within the global egg trade.
>> Mike, this is your specialty.
>> Yeah. Well,
>> again, I I can't speak to the
specificity maybe uh country by country,
but certainly the if you look maybe in
the big picture, the average producer
somewhere in the world that has a
currency issue where it impedes them and
and maybe the quality of their bank, the
their access to capital, uh their access
to to foreign currency to um to upgrade
whatever it is. Absolutely. the tethers
of the world and things like that are
going to fundamentally change the access
to to to that sort of thing where where
when you compare it to the way it was
before for sure. And I and I will maybe
add a little half answer to to what you
threw out there too. There's a lot of
great stories uh for folks looking for
um something to to entertain themselves
around Bitcoin, especially the early
Bitcoin mining that was going on in
Venezuela for people that were concerned
about where the country was going where
they would, you know, tap into a small
hydro plant at maybe a family's uh place
out in the woods somewhere and and and
mine Bitcoin, put it on a wallet and had
it as their escape valve in case they
needed it. And sure enough, you there
was a night where they trapesed through
the jungle and went to another country
and had it on their wallet and and uh
started another life. So yeah, that
there were some very interesting early
pioneering Bitcoin stories around the
what the Bolivar [music] forced folks to
do uh early on.
[music]
>> [music]
>> talk to us about people actually leaving
Venezuela because this is also something
that you hear a lot about which is you
know if you were a Venezuelan with some
amount of means in the past you were
very incentivized to leave um especially
if you were working in certain
businesses that the government was
targeting
Did you experience that at Cargill as
well? This sort of brain drain. It
>> happened all the time. First, I want to
set the scene, right? We have a um at
the time we had an office in Caracus.
Very nice, right? A lot of employees
there, not just kind of because we have
we had a brand business, right? We had
people that were, you know, label
designers and I mean it was the fullon
think of it I don't know more of maybe
the Proctor and G the retail side of
things. So big office, nice um we had,
you know, satellite communications
there. There was no Starlink yet. Um and
so the office was a nice place, right?
And people actually, you know, they're
like, "Oh yeah, I was there on
Saturday." And I'm like, you know, and
the problem is is when you left that
office, you zipped to your gated
community, more likely an apartment
complex. Um you you just had to go from
secured compound to secured compound.
And then it became, you know, you didn't
know if you were having water that week
or hot water. You might not have
electricity for several days. Um, you
might not have access, there might not
be anything to buy in a grocery store.
Um, now our employees were getting some
food from us because we made some
basics, right? You know, every week we
would make sure that we got something
transferred from the plants and and put
this stuff together. So the life um
style that people lived was not easy
even for those that theoretically had
you know were well educated, had good
jobs and eventually
um even our business of course the the
business is slowing down um and they
leave. Um and then of course in our case
we had a plant that got uh nationalized
at gunpoint. Well, if you're, you know,
a highly skilled manager operator, you
don't want to stick around and start to
have to do your job at gunpoint,
right? Because they don't have any
expertise in how to run the plant. So,
the big wave, the first wave, the first,
somebody said several million
Venezuelans
were the most educated, the most
skilled, and it compounded itself,
right? Because, you know, now nobody
knows how to run the electric generation
station, right? The nobody knows, you
know, obviously the prochemical
industry, right? you can go get
reemployed around the world, you know,
if you're a, you know, a pro engineer,
no problem. And so those people went all
over the place. And the beauty of
working for a multinational is we picked
up as many as we could. And that is, you
know, in that conversation to bring, you
know, you have an employee they call,
they're they're very nationalistic, they
know they're doing important work,
they've had enough, and you get that
call and they go, you know, they're
they're they it's kind of sheepish.
They're like, they feel like they're
abandoning you. And you know, we go and
find them. And my story was, you know,
employee, one of my last employees just
says, "I'm I'm going to Mexico City."
Um, I think his wife had was working for
Sony at the time and had some type of
employment. And I said, "What are you
going to do?" And he goes, "I don't
know, but I'm not going to be here
anymore." you know, I mailed my I mailed
my big screen TV and a couple things DHL
and I'm going to take my guitars on the
plane and I'm done. And I said, "Well, I
know what you're going to do. You're
going to go to this address and you're
going to work for me in Mexico." And
that played out hundreds of times inside
my employer. Um, you'd go to a meeting
uh in Mexico City. I still remember a
management meeting. They run a very
large crush refine facility north of
Mexico City. And half the half the
people in the room are Venezuelans,
talented, smart, educated, and that, you
know, that played out. I know, you know,
from my social media, you know, that
happened in lots of Western companies.
They're very I my experience working
with Venezuelans was it was fantastic.
They had a good education system, smart,
business savvy, and um we gladly
remployed them around the world.
Sticking with Venezuela for a moment and
we've heard all the numbers about the
oil industry and the amount of upfront
capital it would take to sort of
profitably begin shipping oil at scale
or selling oil at scale. What is your
understanding like right now of the
equivalent within the realms that you're
working in grains? Like is there the
same ex sort of view that all the
infrastructure that was being used
during the days when it was working
profitably would need a significant
amount of capital for an entity like
Cargill or the sort of family of global
food companies to want to reenter that
business.
>> Look, I am not a Venezuelan expert. Our
business is actually in education and
risk management around supply chains. Um
and we do a lot of work with US growers.
So this was a bit of an accidental
experience to uh to from from what
happened to to bring me here today. Um
we do know we were struggling to keep
the plants maintained. These are but
there and I'm sure there's a lot of work
that has to be done. I think the number
one thing you have to have is security,
right? You have to be able you're going
to need some promises that there's a lot
of companies that lost a lot of money in
Venezuela,
right? with the assets they had because
the second you walk away from an asset
there try to even say mothball it
everything gets stolen
okay that you don't expect there's you
walk into a plant that you shut down 5
years ago that there'll be anything
there um you have to defend it a couple
times otherwise if somebody's going to
go in there and you know sell the parts
in the black market and scrap the rest
because scrap iron trades in dollars and
um so you can't expect that there's
unless the whatever it is is honey. Um,
you can't expect much. And I know that
there they were started strange again,
strange things that happened as the
domestic situation got worse. They
actually had to increase imports of
finished goods because you couldn't
finish them in the country anymore, but
there was still demand and you had
remittances, right? Same with like
Mexico, right? So, there is some dollars
floating even into people that stayed. I
know, you know, we had some employees
that talk about sending money to their
families in Venezuela and easier to do
now probably, but that was, you know,
the Miami banking connection and some
things like that. So, um I suspect that
there's yeah, tremendous amount of work,
but I'm not an expert on the current
situation. I think it can be done in the
basic staples. Those plants are not that
hard. Flower mills, oil refineries.
Yeah. You know, there's no doubt if the
world put their mind to it. And I just
saw we sold $300 million worth of oil
here this morning. They went apparently
to buy the currency. Remember we talked
about currency stabilization.
Apparently, they must have used a lot of
that to buy both of ours and create a
more stable exchange so you can get the
economy floating. So, you know, hats off
to the current administration for
somebody's obviously paying attention.
But yeah, it's going to take security.
It's going to take some promises,
stability, because, you know, you're
talking about putting hundreds of
millions of dollars on the ground into
an place where effectively those those
type of investments were lost. And I
don't think that's going to be an easy
sell to the multinational world.
>> What was it like just moving stuff
within Venezuela? Because you describe
how an empty plant would uh would be
gutted fairly quickly. I imagine if
people saw an opportunity uh you know a
truckload of something that could be
valuable um on the road they probably
seized on that as well.
>> Yeah. I mean it doesn't matter. You know
Venezuela was you know we had um
security experts that work for us that
understood what they had to ground you
know do on the ground to get shipments
like say from the port to the plant or
from the plant to a to a grocery store
right or something like that or some
kind of distribution. very it's very
difficult. My more recent You think this
doesn't go on and in Mexico, you know,
we were losing
a lot of trucks. Sometimes we'd get the
trucks back. Sometimes we lost the cargo
and the trucks.
>> Um that still goes on right today. And
you sit there and try to understand what
is the cost of doing business, right?
And you will lose some along the way.
And um sometimes you h you hire local
companies that are more able to navigate
how to get things moved from point A to
point B and you effectively have to work
from inside your compound. You also have
to secure
uh from theft right at the compound,
right? It's just all these drags on the
economy when you get into these
situations, right? It's just dragging
the entire country down in
hyperinflation. I think if you studied
in, you know, Mike and I both have some
economics degrees. Um, there's all these
dragging taxes on people, you know, your
employee gets paid today and they just
as soon as they get paid, they run out
and spend it like they're done for the
rest of the day, right? The shoe leather
tax,
>> right? And and you know, now everything
has to be secured with, you know,
multi-fences and barb wire and constant
guards and guards and trucks and all
that stuff. And if you can remove that
burden from the economy, it's just a
huge, you know, you know, in, you know,
boost to the economy. Mike and I are,
you know, watching things in Argentina.
Uh, I love going there. It's a beautiful
place and highly recommend. Um, but, you
know, let's see how that goes because it
feels like the the country is starting
to lose some of those shackles.
>> Tracy, I just have a warning to you, by
the way,
>> to me specifically. Okay.
>> Yeah. You're not going to like it. I've
been watching the show Land Man on CBS
and so when we do commodity episodes I'm
going to make a start referencing a lot
of things that I observe but one of the
themes is one of the plot lines very
early on is the is the phenomenon of
both trucks that disappear because the
cartels still them and then magically
reappear a month later and it's not
worth asking any questions because then
you have to get the FBI involved and
etc. So, uh, that the idea what, uh,
what Jeff was saying about the truck
suddenly coming back is something that,
um, I'm I'm familiar with because I'm a
viewer of TV,
>> stood up by the television. I'm going to
steal myself for all the land.
>> Yeah, you're going to get a lot,
especially when we do oil episodes.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, Mike, uh, talk to us the, uh, give
us sort of your sense of Ukraine now and
versus before the war. And obviously
there's still weed flowing out, but
we've talked about the impairments, etc.
what is the sort of scale of the
impairment and the damage etc and what
sort of levels are coming out of Ukraine
and sort of give us your sense of where
things are these days versus at the end
of uh 2021.
>> Sure. And and again I'm going to I'm
going to say something fairly similar to
what Jeff is. I'm not as on the ground
there though I'm very close with a lot
of friends that are still farming at
scale and uh and trying to make whatever
it is they're doing uh work. I I would I
would sort of start off with a a theme
I'm sure you've heard that you know
they're incredibly resilient people.
They've been through similar things like
this before and perhaps not this
generation but certainly in the not too
distant past. U whether it be the
halommore and you know postsviet uh
situation and uh and and some of the
starvation that came out of that and
then the the world wars one and two and
so it isn't like it's that distant in in
in their past and they're figuring it
out in a in a relatively simplified way.
And and I think that the the the the two
biggest changes as it pertains to the
grain side is a a simplification. So
instead of some of the more complex to
grow or expensive to grow crops like
sunflowers and corn, um they're pivoting
more back to the basics of of wheat and
and barley and and and things like that
that just when in doubt, put that out
there and and and see if we can get at
it in the spring. the human the human
capital piece is is an enormous problem
right now. They you know just to find
people that can can be part of your work
teams whether it be driving the trucks
or driving the combines and tractors and
or or overseeing the grain elevator
operations is is really really hard. And
and then as I alluded to earlier, the
some of the main horsepower export
points have either been damaged or
eliminated entirely or disrupted in
terms of them being kind of grazed to
where they're located relative to this
this current, you know, uh fighting
front, sort of where it's located. But
they're limping along. And you know, I I
I I've been kind of surprised to be
honest with you, the total amount of
grain that's been grown. It's just the
mix has changed. the directions through
which they're exported are changed and
and certainly that that ultimately
changes the price that comes back to the
producer there. So, I'm sure they're not
doing particularly well, but they're,
you know, to their credit, they're still
uh they're still giving it a a hard
swing.
>> Just real quickly, so a thing I would
like to learn today, what is it about
wheat that makes it a sort of simpler
crop to process and export than uh corn?
Well, the the the seed is is materially
uh less expensive. The the fertility
required is is is materially less
expensive, you know, per acre in their
world world, per hectare. The other
thing that's just circumstantially uh
supportive in that part of the world is
the the organic matter and the the the
richness of the soil there is is
incredible. So you can kind of get away
with it with with lesser intensive
aggronomic crops like wheat to to still
ek out a pretty darn good crop. So
that's the the the circumstance there.
It's also fairly easy to recycle your
wheat and you utilize it as seed uh
where that's not as straightforward with
with other crops.
I have one last question and this is to
both of you, but what would be your
major piece of advice or message to a
multinational company that's considering
either, you know, maybe they're looking
at Venezuela and going, there's an
opportunity there. I want in. Or maybe
they're thinking about post-war Ukraine
and expansion there. What would you tell
those companies?
Well, I mean, you have to have some
expertise if you're going to go into
these places. So, if you don't have it
with you, you need to find it and find
people you trust. Security is going to
be your number one part of it and start,
you know, start with a small uh
business, right? To learn how things
actually work. We used to start with
feed mills. They're rel you can put up a
Kaiser, relatively small portable feed
mills, and start to learn how things
actually work on the ground. We have
hundreds of stories where we bought
businesses, thought we knew what was
going on even after we'd been there,
only to find up on first day that, oh,
you know, you weren't you you're
supposed to pay a bribe to the meat
inspector or something like that. So, my
advice is find a small business that you
can run there with a reasonable
investment and treat that as a learning
curve or learn, you know, paying tuition
before you jump in and uh make it uh
make those big uh hard capital asset
investments. Yeah, and Ukraine has
slightly different context. I think the
blueprint is there is if you look at the
the the I would kind of describe the
glory days of of of the grain business
in the late uh 90s when the
infrastructure really got built back
back up in in a way that served the
global markets with a lot of value added
processing. Tremendous amount of
investment that went through the thes
you know probably 05 068 right around
there. So the blueprint is there. I I
just think it's going to take, you know,
resilient people uh patients uh
attempting to maintain your teams uh
there within the reality of of of the
things that are going to be personal
decisions for them, for their safety,
for their family, for [music] whatever.
Um you're just going to have to go with
that flow for the foreseeable future and
see how this all plays out.
>> All right, Mike and Jeff, thank you so
much for coming on OddLotss. That was
fascinating. We could go on for another
hour or two or three and listen to all
your stories um of doing business in
[music] these places, but we're going to
have to leave it there. So, thank you so
much.
>> Yeah, thanks for having us on. Thank
you.
>> [music]
>> Joe, that was super interesting both
from an agricultural perspective and
then obviously Venezuelan and Ukrainian
perspective. One thing that stood out to
me was this idea of large companies,
multinationals coming together when they
enter a new market like that because it
becomes easier to operate, I guess, at
the legal and cultural level that
they're used to. That was really
interesting.
>> Yeah, I hadn't thought about that at
all. Right. So, it's like global
multinationals even setting aside law,
you know, they have certain norms you
just sort of expect and so someone from
Nestle talks to someone from I don't
know what whatever and they're like,
"Oh, we have a shipment here at this
time." And they can more or less expect
that that entity will do that,
>> right?
>> And without too much translation or
whatever. And so, the idea that that is
really important is something I hadn't
thought of. also on this and it's
something I've thought about even
working working at a large multinational
ourselves is this way that like large
companies are sort of we call them
multinationals but they're also like
nations unto themselves in this sense
like think about the fact that when you
move from New York to Abu Dhabi to Hong
Kong and back to New York that there is
a team that facilitates all of these
processes of like visas and stuff like
that and so forth and Like and I thought
about that when he described the
phenomenon of the workers being more
comfortable in the office than back
home. That like the the the corporate
office in this environment is like this
like pocket of sort of I guess you would
say developed world ease and comfort,
right? And that the moment you leave
that office you are out of that. Then
you suddenly have to worry about
electricity. Then you sort of have to
worry about maybe running water and
security and how big companies sort of
create these security and legal
environments within themselves that are
these like crossborder pockets but that
will be the same from one office to
another regardless of what country
they're operating in.
>> Yeah, absolutely. The other thing that I
was thinking about was the currency
question when it comes to Venezuela. I
mean, you would assume with maybe this
new relationship with the US, access to
dollars maybe will get a a little bit
easier, but it was fascinating to hear
from Jeff just how creative they got
when it came to securing dollars. So,
for instance, you know, trying to export
wooden pallets in exchange for US
currency and things like that. I
basically bartering, right? Yeah, it
does sound like it basically comes down
to borrow bartering or like here are
some sacks of salt that can be used and
then you have this issue which is that
you can have all of the talent on the
country
>> although much of it's left in in many of
these cases but you have all this talent
and you have all this raw commodities
but you need a part and you need it from
some advanced specialty maker of an
industrial part for refinery or whatever
and that's sold by a European
multinational and you need hard currency
for that and So there is no getting
around this fact that like true
self-sufficiency is very rare. It almost
doesn't exist anywhere in the world so
long as any one component and of course
we know this is what China is trying to
solve for. They want to have every
>> aspect of the entire supply chain
inhouse such that there is no
possibility of them not being able to
access one part and grinding a whole
industry to a halt.
>> Yeah. All right. Um we could go on but
shall we leave it there? Let's leave it
there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guests
Jeff and Mike and their work at Agress
Academy at agrisacademy. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Armano Bennett at Dashbot and Kalebrooks
at Kalebrooks. And for more OddLots
content, go to bloomberg.com/odlotss
with a daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about what it was [music]
really like to do business in places
like Venezuela and Ukraine, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg subscriber,
[music]
you can listen to all of our episodes
absolutely adree. All you need to do is
find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcasts and follow the instructions
there. [music]
Thanks for listening.
[music]
>> [singing]